Now as we saw in the previous videos
in this section,
Python classes don't need getters and setters
to allow you to read and change the values
of their data attributes
or instance variables if you're more familiar with that term
from other programming languages.
Python adopts the philosophy
that we're all responsible adults
so it doesn't have the facility
to make class attributes private
like many other object oriented languages do.
Now with that said,
getters and setters are still useful in Python,
even if they're not essential so in this video,
we're gonna take a look at what they are,
how to create them, and why you might want to do so.
Now I'm gonna start off
by doing something quite controversial.
I'm gonna put each of our classes in a separate file.
Now this is the usual way of doing things in C++ or Java,
but there's no need to have one file per class in Python.
And in fact,
if I was creating these classes in a working programme,
I would actually keep them all in the same file.
But the reason I'm gonna do that here
is because we're gonna be flicking back and forth
looking at the various classes
while I describe what's going on
and that's much easier to do
if each class appears in its own tab in the editor
rather than scrolling up and down through a single file.
And it also provides an excuse to show you another way
of importing a class.
So I'm doing it here
but remember that it's not necessary to do this in Python.
You're better off keeping related classes in the same file
so that each file is organised based on functionality.
Okay, so we're gonna use the characters
in a role playing type game for our examples
so let's create a new Python project.
We're gonna call it game.
Python is selected there.
Game.
Now our first class is gonna be used
to represent the people playing the game
so let's create a new Python file called player.py
so I'm just gonna come over here as normal,
right click, new, Python file, file I should say,
player is the name, all right.
So each player is gonna have a name
as well as things like the number of lives they've got left
and their score.
So we're gonna start with this basic player class.
So we're gonna type class Player object colon enter enter
and then we're gonna do def space underscore underscore init
and you saw that I just selected that for ourself,
but then I also need to do a semicolon and a name
for the parameter and we're gonna do self.name equals name
then we're gonna do self.lives is equal to three,
self.level is equal to one and self.score equals zero.
So the convention is that class name
should start with a capital letter,
although some of the built-in classes in Python
don't follow that convention.
Now this is a very simple class with four data attributes
and their given values in the class constructor,
the underscore underscore init,
underscore underscore method.
And again, that's the class constructor.
Now we pass one of these values as a parameter
so when we create each player,
they're given a name when they're created.
Now the other three values start off with default values,
three for lives, one for level and a score of zero.
All right, so we're going to put all the code
that uses the classes in a file called main.py
so let's go ahead and create that.
We're gonna right click on new Python file, call it main,
and the code is gonna be import space Player,
tim equals player in lowercase dot player in uppercase
and then tim,
print tim.name and print tim.lives.
Okay, now I've accidentally put a capital P in there
for the import and it should've been lowercase P
because the filename you can see in the top left hand corner
has a lowercase P for the name
so I'll just do a lowercase P
and we can see it's now finding it
and that error should disappear.
All right, so just to confirm this, if we run this now,
okay, we can see there,
I'm gonna move this down to the bottom,
the player's name is tim and he's got three lives.
All right, now having to type player with lowercase
dot player in uppercase
every time we wanna refer to the player class
is gonna be a bit annoying
so we can change the way that we input the player module
to avoid this.
So up here on line one, let's actually change this
instead of import player to be
from player import Player with a capital P
and then we can just change this definition here
just to be tim equals Player tim
and we can run this and we get the same result.
So basically we can refer to the player class
without having to qualify it with the module name.
Now I did suggest previously
that you don't use this kind of import
and generally I wouldn't recommend it.
But here though,
each module is only gonna contain a single class
so there's really not gonna be any confusion
about where a player is coming from.
Now as I've said,
you probably wouldn't place each class in its own file,
but as we are doing that to this exercise,
we may as well make it a lot easier for ourselves.
All right, so we've got a basic player class
and we could take lives away from the players
as we get into scraps and take damage
from the monsters that they'll be fighting.
So we can do something like here on line seven
tim.lives minus equals one
which is obviously going to deduct the number of lives,
one from the number of lives,
and print out tim.lives and if you run this,
we get this at the bottom of the screen
showing the lives has been decremented and it's now two.
So this is making fine
and the code is accessing the player class
data attributes directly to print them out
or alter their values.
Now the attributes such as lives and names
are encapsulated in the player class,
but they're not hidden
and that's something that I'm sure Java and C++ programmers
will find horrible because in those languages,
providing direct access to the data attributes
is really frowned upon but in Python,
it's considered the opposite,
in other words the way to do things.
So the first thing I'm gonna say about getters and setters
in Python is don't use them.
And I guess that's probably a strange thing to say
in a video about using getters and setters in Python
so I better explain that I don't mean never use them,
I mean don't worry about them
when you're creating your classes
and that's because chances are you won't need them
so don't spend time creating getters and setters
that won't be needed.
Now in Python, you can add a getter or a setter or both
after you created your class and any code using the class
will continue to work fine,
but in Java or C++ that's not possible.
If you allow access to class instance variables later
to start to make them private,
any code that uses the class will have to be changed
to use the getters and setters instead.
As we see in Python though, client code,
that's code that is using the class, isn't affected.
All right, so what are these getters and setters?
Well, a getter is actually a method
that's used to get the value of a data attribute.
So as an example, if we look at the code on line five,
it's actually printing out
the data attribute directly, tim.name,
so instead of that if we wanted to access a name,
we might come down and do something like this,
print tim.get underscore name like so.
So the get underscore name method is called a getter
and normally it just returns the value
of the corresponding variable,
but it can actually do more than that.
For example, the getter for the score
could multiply the score by perhaps the number of lives.
That way, a player's score is much higher
if they've completed the game without losing too many lives.
So getters can be useful
and you'll want to add them sometimes,
but the point I'm making
is that you can add them to the class
if you later decide you need them,
but there's no point in creating them
just for the sake of it
or just because you've come to Python from another language
where you have to use a getter
if you think there might be the faintest possibility
that you'll need one in the future.
All right, so that's the getter,
but a setter is just a method
that's used to set the value of the class data attribute
and it might look something like this,
tim.set underscore lives 300.
A setter may be useful for the lives attribute
of our player class.
It doesn't make sense for the number of lives
to drop below zero so using a setter is a good way
to check the value before updating the attribute.
Now these two examples on line 10 and 11
are how you would use a getter and setter in Java
or C++ for example but in Python,
they actually work a bit differently.
Now the basic principle is the same,
that is to use a method to return the value of an attribute
or assign a new value to it,
but you still use the same syntax
as you would when accessing the attributes directly.
I'm gonna delete these two lines.
Let's go ahead and add a getter and setter
for our lives attribute in the player class.
All right, so going back to the player.py file,
so the first thing we wanna do is hide our lives attribute
by prefixing it with an underscore.
I'm talking about the code here on line five.
So it's gonna be self. and put an underscore there
for underscore lives equals three.
So once we've done that,
we need to create a method to set the value to setter
and of course another method to get the value to getter.
Let's go ahead and do both of those.
So we'll start with the getter
so that's gonna be def space underscore get underscore lives
self colon and return self. underscore lives.
Then we'll do a def underscore set underscore lives
and self in parenthesis
which is added automatically by IntelliJ
and then we're gonna do self. underscore lives
is equal to lives.
And the other thing I'll need to do here is add a parameter
because it's the set method.
We need to pass the number of lives we wanna set it to
and that's it.
Now once again, we're hiding these methods
by starting their names with an underscore.
Of course, they're not really hidden as such,
but there's no need for clients to use them directly
and the underscore at the start of the name
gives users of our class an indication
that they shouldn't really be calling these methods.
Okay, so the last step now
is to define a property called lives
that uses these two methods
when reading and writing our lives attribute.
All right, so let's actually add that now.
So we put lives is equal to property
and it's going to be underscore get underscore lives
without the parenthesis
and underscore set underscore lives
again without any parenthesis.
So our data attribute is now called underscore lives
and we've replaced it with a property called lives
that uses these two methods to access the number of lives
that the player has.
Now back in main.py, if I go back over there,
I can run the programme as is
and everything should still work.
We get the same results as we got previously.
Tim starts off with three lives
which we've printed out on line six.
Then there's two left after we subtract one on line seven
and obviously we're printing out the results of that
on line eight.
So I haven't actually had to make any changes
to our main programme
so it continues to use the player class
in exactly the same way as it did
before we changed the lives attribute
to use the getter and setter methods.
But now that we've done this,
we can add some validation to the setter method
to prevent the number of lives from dropping below zero.
So going back to our player class in the setter method,
we could add some code to do that validation
so we could put if space lives
is greater than or equal to zero colon
then we'll put our self. underscore lives equals lives
then we'll add an else clause else
and we've got our print lives cannot be negative
and self. underscore lives equals zero.
All right, so that's the validation
that only effectively allows us
to set the value of the lives variable,
underscore lives variable,
if the values passed is greater than or equal to zero.
And if that's not the case,
then we print out the message lives cannot be negative
and then we set underscore lives to zero.
So while I'm here,
I'm gonna add a method that we can use
to print out the values of the attributes
so let's go ahead and do that.
We'll put that below the lives property line.
We def space underscore underscore str underscore underscore
and we add the self which added automatically by IntelliJ
then let's return
name and curly brace zero.name
lives zero.lives
level zero.level
and finally score zero.score
and at the end of that line after the double quote,
.format self.
So when you print an object,
Python looks for a special method
called underscore underscore str underscore underscore
which we've just defined on line 21
and I'm gonna call that method
when it needs a string representation of the object
such as when you wanna print it.
Now I've created this method
so that we can easily see the values of the attributes
and I'll come back to that strange use
of the replacement field shortly.
Okay, so we've added some code to the lives setter
to prevent the number of lives going negative
so let's test this.
So we're going back to the main programme
and let's copy lines seven and eight three more times
so I'm gonna copy those
and let's put them outside there, there and three
as you can see.
So we're reducing the value of lives by one each time
and printing out the value
until we get down to the last value
which hopefully is going to be hitting zero,
but the other thing I probably should have done
before I copied it was change this
so instead of just printing out lives,
it prints out just tim.
And now that we've created
that underscore underscore str function,
let's take advantage of that, okay, like so.
So let's run this now and see if it works.
All right, so you can see there
that we've got our lives getting reduced each time we call
and then once it gets to below zero
or would have gone below zero,
we see that we got a message lives cannot be negative
and the number of lives remains at zero.
So although setters aren't needed as such in Python,
they're very useful when you'd want to include validation
on the values that your data attributes can be set to.
All right, so I've skimmed over a couple of things
that we've done in the player class so in the next video,
let's have a look at those things in a bit more detail.
I'll see you in the next video.